hello everyone this is Jim Lucy
editor-in-chief for electrical
wholesaling electrical marketing with
the May 15 2023 edition of today's
electrical economy podcast series
sponsored by Champion fiberglass the
company began producing epoxy fiberglass
condo in fittings in 1988 and in 1989
developed the first conduit from epoxy
residents that had flame resistance and
low smoke characteristics
this met the most surrendered codes and
specifications today's podcast will
offers some more insight into what top
150 Distributors think about the current
business climate and we'll take a look
at some of the largest construction
projects they're supplying or have seen
on the drawing boards in their local
market areas
we will also check out some weekly
economic indicators that can give you a
sense of where the USA Economy and
electrical market may be headed
these five weekly indicators are initial
unemployment claims at the state level
we all freight car traffic
the baker huge rate count
oil prices and copper prices our thanks
again to Champion fiberglass for
sponsoring to today's electrical economy
podcast series for 2023.
for the weekend in May the 6th the
advanced figure for seasonally adjusted
initial claims was 264 000 and that's an
increase of 22 000 from the previous
week's unrevised level of 242 000. this
is the highest level for initial claims
since the October 30th 2021 when it was
264 thousand
the U.S unemployment rate for the month
of April is 3.4 percent
these five states had the largest
decreases in unemployment claims for a
week ending of May the 6th Kentucky was
down 3015 Colorado's unemployment claims
were down to 1517.
Georgia was down
1116. New Hampshire's claims were down
497 and Wisconsin's claims were down
460.
we had a fair number of states that came
in with unemployment claims of more than
one thousand for the weekend of May the
sixth Massachusetts led the list with 6
375 more claims California came in with
2924 more claims Missouri came in at
2447. Texas was in there at
1471. New York came in at 1 324 and then
Ohio came in at one thousand and forty
five
one of the more interesting leading
economic indicators for the overall U.S
economy is Freight rail traffic it's a
measure of the amount of moral materials
and finish schools being shipped by rail
the best source for this data is the
American Association of railroads or AAR
it publishes this data weekly at
www.aar.org
the most recent weeks data showed that
total U.S weekly rail traffic was 471
859 car loads and intramural units and
that is down 6.6 percent compared with
the same week last year total combined
U.S Freight traffic for the first 18
weeks of 2023 was 8 million three
hundred seventy thousand eight hundred
sixty four car loads and instrumental
units and that is a decrease of 5.6
percent compared to last year
five of the 10 Carla commodity groups
posted an increase compared with the
same week in 2022 they included metallic
oars and metals up 2.8 percent to twenty
thousand six hundred ninety seven
non-metallic minerals up four percent to
35 326 carloads petroleum and petroleum
products up 11.6 percent to ten thousand
one hundred thirty three the commodity
groups that posted decreases compared to
the same week in 2022 included chemicals
down 5.8 percent
Intermodal units down to 10.9 percent
and grain down six percent to 21 000 and
700.
if you track the oil Market you're
probably familiar with the baker whose
root count which tracks the oil and gas
rigs that are operating the data is
available by state by Basin and
nationally at
www.rootcount.baker hughes.com
if you track the oil Market you're
probably familiar with the Baker Hughes
rate count which tracks the oil and gas
strings that are operating the data is
available by state
by Basin and nationally at
www.redcount.bakerhughes.com
the total rate count dropped by seven
rigs in the most recent data which for
Baker Hughes is pretty significant drop
because the data most often only changes
by one or two rigs per week the Permian
Basin was responsible for much of this
decline with a decrease of five Rigs and
the Eagle Ford base in the Texas lost
three rigs
the current price of West Texas
intermediate crude oil or WTI as of May
15th is 70.41 cents per barrel that's
according to macrotrends.net the average
price of of WTI per barrel in 2023 is
76.36
economists like to call Copper
purchasing Dr copper because it's a
leading economic indicator for future
business activity since copper is used
in so many Industries the construction
industry is among the leading markets
for copper because of its use in wiring
cable and copper plumbing pipe
common copper prices as of May the 15th
or 3.78 cents per pound they have been
below four dollars per pound for the
month of May the average price for the
year is still sitting at above four
dollars per pound and it's at four
dollars and six cents per pound
now let's take a look at some of the
results of our top 150 distributor
survey which will be published in two
weeks quite a bit of good data and
insight into some of the business
conditions as seen by the top 150
distributors
2002 was a pretty good year for the top
150 Distributors with the average
increase at the high end of the typical
range which is between four and eight
percent a couple of percentage of points
of that increase was due to pricing in
as you can imagine and you can see that
in the chart here where we're ranked by
the number of mentions inflation or
pricing is up it was up one of the
highest categories for responses uh
generally speaking the increasing
counselor man was another big response
to the survey better economy right about
the same taking market share also right
in that same area of about 12
distributors or we gave that as a
response more construction business was
also a very common response that's where
it's the expansion efforts and new
channel sales some folks pointed to
supplier growth others to organic growth
a bigger focus on customer service also
big the decline of covet issues
Acquisitions quality of their employees
new marketing efforts a data center
business was called out in particular
and that the hiring of more sales people
also contributed to a Better Business
year for many of our top 150
distributors
found the answers to this question one
of the most interesting on our survey we
asked them basically what do they expect
for 2023 growth and despite the current
economic conditions and the uncertainty
about the US economy as you can see our
top 150 Distributors are still quite
bullish even if you consider taking in a
two maybe three points for inflation
growth but we've got responses from 89
different distributors filled out this
question between six and nine for
looking at growth of between six and
nine percent we had 21 percent the
largest category actually was over a
double digit growth 28 were looking for
growth between 10 and 14 percent 12
percent we're looking at growth of 15 to
19 percent and almost 17 percent were
looking for 20 or better growth only a
6.7 percent were said they don't expect
any growth in 2023.
I'm always impressed with the variety of
large construction projects that the top
150 Distributors work on even more so
this year with all the uncertainty about
the US economy let's take a look at some
of the largest projects that they're
working on
we had respondents right in with about
the work that they're doing or expect to
be doing with battery plants in Michigan
Ohio and Kansas one distributor talked
about the Air Force Academy Visitor
Center that they're working on in
Colorado Springs Colorado
uh we had a one or two Distributors
actually called out the semiconductor
plant that's being built by Intel in New
Albany Ohio
Charleston South Carolina airport is
seeing a lot of activity one
philadelphia-based distributor talked
about the Sparks therapeutic gene
therapy facility in Philadelphia which
is a huge huge job in the Cleveland area
Distributors talked about the Cleveland
Clinic neurology project there the
Cleveland Browns Stadium
we also talked had people talk about the
Facebook Google and Yahoo data centers
in Iowa
one distributor based in Huntsville
Alabama talked about the FBI projects in
that area Georgia power grid
modernization made the list as did the
Indiana Health University Hospital in
Indianapolis
just a continuation of some of the other
projects that Distributors are working
on JFK Airport was mentioned by several
distributors in New York as was the JP
Morgan Chase Tower in Midtown Manhattan
facility solutions group talked about
the Netflix production campus is going
to be built in Fort Monmouth New Jersey
and also the Lionsgate Studios for movie
production being built in Newark New
Jersey
out in the midwest in St Louis the
national geospatial agency or the NGA
West facility is being built that's a
billion dollar project right there big
projects being built by Nucor steel and
expand expansion in Kentucky they're two
different sites I believe in Pittsburgh
we had the Pittsburgh airport which
recently renovated and also it looks
like a new terminal going in there
University of Pittsburgh has got some
housing projects and Labs being built
and the new FNB tower being built in
Pittsburgh
out on Long Island you have the
Brookhaven National Labs a new rink
particular accelerated up to New York
on the west coast LAX airport in Los
Angeles and in Cincinnati University of
Cincinnati has seen some classroom and
office construction being built
that wraps up our podcast for today and
a special thanks to the folks from
Champion fiberglass response from the
today's electrical economy podcasters
for 2023.
please contact me if there's any other
type of economic date you would like us
to cover these podcasts our next
presentation will be on June 12 2023.
next week I'll be at the light Fair show
in New York and if any of you are
heading for that I hope to see you there
look forward to chatting with you if I
do until then
be happy be healthy look forward to
talking with you in several weeks
hello everyone this is Jules the
editor-in-chief of electrical wholesale
and electrical market May 1st 2023
edition of the today's electrical
economy podcast sponsored by Champion
fiberglass Champion began producing
approximate Wireless condolences in 1988
throughout the first conduit from epoxy
residents that had flame resistance with
low smoke characteristics this meant the
most surrendered codes and
specifications
today's podcast will look at some of the
biggest moves the electrical price index
for March is published by a electrical
marketing newsletter it offers some more
insight to what the top 150 of
Distributors think about the current
business climate we'll also check out
some weekly economic indicators that can
give you a sense of where the US economy
or the electrical market may be headed
in the next few months these five weekly
indicators are initial unemployment
claims at the state level real freight
car traffic the baker huge recount oil
prices and copper prices
our thanks again to Champion fire list
for sponsoring today's electrical
economy podcast series for 2023.
for the week ending April the 22nd the
advanced figure for seasonally adjusted
initial unemployment claims 230 000.
that's a decrease of Sixteen thousand
previous weeks from price level the
four-week moving average final
employment plans are still here
fourth house from the previous weeks we
buy Savage
the US unemployment rate for March is
3.5 percent
these five states had the biggest
decreases in our employment plan for the
weekend April the 22nd Ohio's claims
were down 3280
New Jersey was down 3073 California's
claims were down 3003. Connecticut was
down 1999 and Rhode Island was down
1428.
on the flip side these five states had
the biggest increases of unemployment
claims for the weekend April the 22nd
Illinois initial unemployment claims
were up to 2636 New York was up 1548.
mississippians claims were up 1171
Colorado's claims were up 676 and
Michigan's claims were up 573.
an interesting leading economic
indicator for the overall U.S economy is
free rail traffic it's a measure of the
amount of raw materials and finish which
being shipped by rail the best source
for the state is the American
Association of railroad which publishes
this data weekly at www.aar.org
it was recent week
total U.S weekly rail traffic was 480
457 Carlos and inter18 which is down 3.5
percent compared with the same time last
year total combined U.S traffic for the
first 16 weeks of 2023 was seven million
four hundred seventeen thousand and
forty five car loads at neutral Windows
that's a decrease of 5.6
compared to last year
well the year over year weekly declines
continue and that Freight fine was still
well below the 500 000 car loans and
Intermodal units in which that we have
seen in healthier times and noticeable
that the most recent date is a
first-time Freight volume top 480 000
car loans and intro motor units January
6 of the ten commodity was supposed to
increase compared with the same week
last in the year they included coal
which is up 0.5 percent 688 879 000
motor vehicles and parts which is up
10.2 percent
metallic orders and middles of 2.6
percent
commodity groups that posted decreases
compared with the same week last year
including Grant which is down 6.5
percent Forest Products down 6.3 percent
and chemicals down 6.2 percent
if you track the oil worker you're
probably familiar with the baker huge
recount which tracks the oil and gas
rings that are operating ones the
dangerous available by state by Basin
and nationally at
www.redcount.baker hughes.com
slide gives you an idea for the largest
oil and gas to process it really gives
you a good sense of just how many of the
large oil plays are in Texas and
Oklahoma and how they can carry the
Marcellus gas region covers in
Pennsylvania Ohio and parts of West
Virginia
the total recount increased by five
rings to 753 during the weekend of April
21st it's up 58 rigs year over year for
an 80 year over year gain in another
major basis so any really big change in
ring activity more than one week except
for the Permian Basin which was up two
rigs the Permian basis we've mentioned
many times over this podcast is these
large by far in the U.S its total weekly
account right now stands at 358 rigs
which is up to 24 rigs from last year's
count of
334 rigs
the current price of West Texas crude
oil as of May 1st is 75.81 cents per
barrel and that's according to
macrotrends.net the average price of a
barrel of West Texas immediate crude oil
for 2023 of 76.80
prices to have dipped below the 80 Mark
in mid-april after spending several
weeks above that Mark they did increase
slightly over the last day
economics like to call compromising Dr
copper because
creature activity since copper is used
in so many Industries the construction
industry is among the leading markets
for copper because of its use and wire
cable and copper plumbing pipe
Comics copper prices as of May the first
is 3.97 per pound they are dipped it
below four dollars per pound but the
average price per comex for the year is
still at four dollars and seven cents
per pound for 2023 year to date
now let's take a look at some of the
biggest changes in electrical marketing
so electrical price index we appear to
be passed a lot of the volatility that
we've seen over the past year but there
still are some changes to note
most of the movement notes on a monthly
site which is a whole is down 48 there
are quite a few product categories that
show some declines most of the
categories are conduit fittings which
are down four point three percent for
the month now metallic conduit down 3.3
percent
telephone wire down point five percent
Powerline cable down point three percent
full line Hardware down point two
percent boxes were down one percent
point one percent
there weren't devices and connectors
were the only it was the only category
that was above one percent one percent
of Republic I should say when you take a
look at the slider on the right which is
the year over year data uh they changes
were not quite as dramatic but some
products are still showing some huge
year over year gains products showing
some of the biggest gains or wiring
devices and connectors up to 25.4
percent year over year metal conduit up
20.6 percent
switch gears up 3.5 percent Transformers
up to 12.1 percent
amps up 11.7 percent
fuses up to 11.5 and another category
that was up double digits were boxes
which is up 2.1 percent uh this is just
a few of the highlights the electrical
marketing price index if you want to get
the monthly data plus historical dating
going all the way back to the 1990
right for 99 per year for a monthly
update on the electrical price index and
you can find the information on that
electricalmarketing.com
this chart will give you an idea of just
how big you've seen prices go up over
the past year or two okay if you look at
the chart the Orange Line indicates the
year-over-year change which
20 year over year certainly the month
and month changes were not quite as big
but if you take a look at that blue line
you can see that they increase around
the same time peaking right around the
December 21st to January 22nd time frame
uh historically your rear change or 2.6
percent year over year change on a
month-to-month basis and 0.22 so you can
see there's a changes that we saw
quickly as I mentioned the year of year
being the most schematic
let's take a look at a few more pieces
of data from our surveys coming in from
our top 150 Distributors and just a
gentle reminder if you are an electrical
distributor and you haven't gotten in
your top 150 survey please do so we're
just compiling all our data right now we
want to get a good representation for
this year
slide shows and responses from our top
emergency distribution yes so first and
use your market segments are showing
strong growth in 2023 and which are
lagging behind commercial construction
utility that all categories with more
than 50 percent of respondents saying
they were showing the strongest growth
so far this year there was a pretty much
mix of the comfort of these sections
that were lagging the market and you can
imagine residential construction was up
fairly High commercial construction
about also around the 30 percent Mark uh
industrial construction for our response
also was a little harder I would have
expected when you think about all the
plant plants are going in in the UV and
semiconductor areas nothing too crazy
but it was up about 25 percent of the
respondents said that was a lag in the
market so far but oh and like this it
just gives you a pretty good
representation of the market segments
that the Distributors do anticipate to
grow
as we end up our podcast for today I
just wanted to give you the one more
observation and responses from
Distributors well yes 50 Distributors
which was the key factor in their
increase for sales last year we saw that
the basic growth drivers outside of
inflation were very much in play market
share growth customer man and better
economic time today certainly in these
days inflation was a big thing as well
but it was interesting that market share
customer demand and better economic
conditions which are drivers that for a
good Market that over the years nothing
too surprising about that so I guess it
shows that even in volatile economic
time some things do stay very much to
say
that wraps up our podcast for today and
again a special thanks to the folks from
Champion private responsibility
please do contact me if there's any
other types every day that he would like
us to cover these podcasts our next
presentation will be on May 15 2023 and
if there's if you're an electrical
distributor and you'd like us to be
consider the company for listing in the
top 150 please do get that survey in if
you do need a copy of the survey
with me directly at Jay lucy.com
also as we mentioned with the electrical
price index information that we
discussed today those are just the
highlights of the wealth of data that's
available every month from electrical
marketing for just 99 with your annual
subscription so until our next
presentation on May 15th be healthy be
happy look forward to talking with you
in two weeks
